This project was an assignment for a graduate level Data Analysis class in which I was tasked with locating, cleaning, and presenting a dataset in a manner consistent with a professional data analytical codebook. The dataset selected included basic offensive and defensive statistics for every season of every MLB team dating back to the first official MLB season in 1876. In addition to cleaning the dataset to include a consistent system for dealing with missing observations and narrowing the dataset to include  only offensive statistics, my work focused on using the basic data provided to create several new statistics that are commonly used in the modern game of baseball. These new statistics were batting average, slugging percentage, on base percentage, and OPS (on base plus slugging). Using the existing data, these new statistics were created for each year and team included in the dataset. Each of these new variables highlights a certain part of offensive production that was not adequately captured in the initial basic dataset. Batting average highlights the ability of a team's hitters to successfully achieve hits. Slugging percentage measures how many total bases of offense a team's hits produce. On base percentage notes how likely a team's hitters are to reach base safely in any manner. OPS is commonly used as a snapshot of total offensive producition.From this new data, the average of each new variable for each year was calculated. In addition to creating these new variables for every season of every team in the dataset, the league average of each of the new variables for all of the years in the dataset was added. This way, not only do analysts now have easy access to more advanced offensive performance data for historical MLB seasons, they can now compare each team to the league's average for that year. For example, the new dataset provides the opportunity to determine whether the 100-win World Series champion Mets of 1969 performed better offensively than other teams of that era as well as if they outperformed the 2022 Mets who won a similar number of regular season games but failed to win the World Series. By cleaning this data, creating these 4 new variables, and identifiying each team's score in them relative to that year's average, I was able to demonstrate my ability to produce professional-quality data analytical deliverables that also have value to modern baseball analysts seeking a greater understanding of the history of MLB offenses.
